Hi, and welcome to the conditional
probability lecture as part of
the statistical inference class in
the Coursera data design specialization.
So conditioning is wonderfully
illustrated by this XKCD comic here.
In this case two people are standing
out in a field right near a tree in
the middle of a lightning storm, and
one of them says we should go inside.
The other one says, well, the chance of
getting hit by lightning is only about
one in seven million so we're fine.
And the tagline is that
the death rate among people who
know the statistic is one in six.
And what the comic is highlighting is
that this person hasn't conditioned on
what they know, right.
In this case if you were to
condition on the death rate for
lightning strikes among people who
are standing in fields in lightning
storms near a tree would be much
higher than one in seven million.
Let's go through another example,
so a simple, conceptual example.
So the probability of getting a one
when rolling a standard die is
assumed to be one-sixth.
Suppose that you were given
the extra information that
the die roll was an odd number,
hence a one, three, or five.
So, someone rolled the die in
a way that you couldn't see, and
they told you that a one,
three, or a five occurred.
Conditional on this new information,
you would not say the probability
of a one is one-sixth anymore.
You would now say it's one-third,
equally likely between the one, the three,
or the five.
And that's what conditional
probabilities are giving you.
And of course, they have a definition.
So let's let B be the event,
be an event, such that the probability
of B is greater than zero.
And this is important
because there's no sense in
conditioning on an event
that can't happen.
Then the conditional probability
of an event A given that B has
occurred is written like this.
The probability of A,
little horizontal line, B.
So this read probability of A given
the event that B has occurred is equal to
the probability of the intersection
divided by the probability of B.
And we haven't talked about independence
yet, but in the event that A and
B are unrelated or so called statistically
independent, which we'll define later,
than the probability of A given B,
works out to just be the probability of A.
So the new information that B
has occurred have given you no
information about the probability
of law governing the event A.
So let's just check that conditional
probability gives us the answer that
we know to be true in the die rolling,
case.
So in our case B was the event one,
three, five.
A was the event one.
We want the probability of the event A,
conditional on the event one, three, or
five having occurred.
So, in other words,
we can say probability of getting a one,
given that we know that
the roll is an odd number.
That's the probability of A given B,
which is the probability of A intersect
B over the probability of B.
In this case,
A happens to lie entirely within B, so
the probability of A intersect
B is just the probability of A.
So that works out to be one-sixth,
and then the probability of B
in the denominator works out
to be three-sixths, right.
One-sixth for each of the three
mutually exclusive possibilities,
which works out to be one-third, which
is what we knew had to be the answer.